So I watched that Obama speech in Illinois to college students (mostly because I like to hurt myself) and it crystallized some things for me. He (along with a host of other liberal politicians) would like to see an America governed by a diverse, virtuous, and qualified cabal of technocratic elites. And he doesn’t see the politics as, fundamentally, the activity of collectively deciding how to run our society but as a prominent stage from which those elites can model the way things ought to be done and people ought to behave (although it so happens that what’s being performed on that stage is, to a greater or lesser extent, the just allocation of resources). I feel like he genuinely believed that, as president, the best thing he could do to make America better was to show Americans how to be better. He seemed to carry with him this implicit ideology that, instead of radically challenging existing political and economic hierarchies, Americans ought to behave, as citizens, as bosses, as workers, with a degree of honor, integrity, and empathy befitting their roles and, in so doing, elevate us all. 

So the most important thing to him, I think, was to do his job well. Hence the focus on optics and process over firm policy goals. And I have to admit, there was and still is something very compelling about his vision and the way he performed it (for maybe the same reasons we get really into super heroes and Confucianism), particularly at a time when we’re governed by such essentially mediocre human beings. 

In any case, this means that Obama didn’t really object to Republicans because they wanted to plunder the commons, murder your sick relatives, and live forever off of your literal blood, but because they didn’t demonstrate levels of personal virtue commensurate with their positions. And unfortunately it’s entirely possible for personal virtue (at least as we conceive of it in America) to coexist with the desire to commit (and even the fact of having materially contributed to) mass murder — as long as it’s couched in the proper rhetorical and ideological forms (see John McCain).  
Conservatives, for their part, understand very well the stakes of politics. They’re deeply aware of power, enforced hierarchy is at the core of their ideology after all, and are entirely willing to wield it, unjudiciously, unfairly, dishonorably (for whatever value you place on that word), in order to defend a status quo that benefits them. The Republican Party has been for decades entirely dedicated to dismantling and defanging its opposition by any means necessary because its backers perceive an existential threat, know in their bones that they wouldn’t have a place in a better world.

Corey Robin has started predicting a realignment of the American political landscape. Maybe he’s right, I certainly hope so. And when it comes, it’ll involve a shedding within the broad American left of this weird liberal conflation of political justice with professional and personal ethics (along with our obsessive need to preserve of existing norms and institutions). If self-described Democrats start to embrace a different conception of politics, one whose object is power (in Washington, in the workplace, in the home, on the street), whose activity is the building of power (by whatever means we have), and whose goal is the emancipatory redistribution of power (from the wealthy corporate donor, the abusive boss, the entitled man, the aggro cop), things are going change very quickly. 

From the speech: "If you don't like what's going on ... Do not complain. Don't hashtag. Don't get anxious. Don't retreat. Don't binge on whatever it is you're binging on. Don't lose yourself in ironic detachment. Don't put your head in the sand. Don't boo. Vote. Vote." Imagine the future where instead of “vote” — such an anemic, condescending demand, and one so clearly mediated by a vast, almost unbridgeable difference in political agency — we said to one another “organize (and I’ll help figure out childcare).”